# CS 358, Winter 2025

## Functions Mystery Language

The purpose of this exercise is to explore different possible
semantics for a simple language that includes function definition and
application, in addition to the Boolean and arithmetic expressions
studied in the coding exercises.

In the real world, when we want to understand the semantics of a new
language or language feature, a common approach is to write
exploratory tests and try them out on an implementation.  By careful
crafting of these tests, we can often tease out an understanding of
some subtle language features.  This exercise makes a game out of this
test-based or "experimental" semantics. The idea is due to Shriram
Krishnamurthi's paper at

https://cs.brown.edu/~sk/Publications/Papers/Published/pkf-teach-pl-exp-adv-think/

but this realization of it is a local PSU effort.

To explore the mystery language, you should load the page at

https://andrewtolmach.github.io/mysteries/func/

which displays a testing framework.  This is very similar to the page
we explored in class, but the language syntax and semantics are quite
different! As usual, you can enter expressions and see how they
parse. In addition, for expressions that parse successfully, you will
see the result of evaluating the expression using *four different
interpreters* each representing a *different possible semantics* for
the language. The different variants of the semantics are called A,B,
C, and D.

Your task is to figure out the differences among these four variants
by finding test inputs that cause them to produce different
output. Typically, a single test might behave the same way under three
of the variants, and differently on a fourth.  You need to gather a
small *set* of tests (typically no more than 4 or 5) called
*discriminators*. Each discriminator must produce different output on
at least two variants, and the set taken as a whole must distinguish
*all* the variants. (We call the set a *classifier* for the variants.)
This implies that each pair of languages must be distinguished by at
least one discriminator. This will require a good deal of
experimentation!

Note that as you perform tests, the results will be recorded in a log
at the bottom of the web page. You can cut and paste from that log to
prepare your solution file as described below. WARNING: The log only
lasts a long as the web page stays open in your browser, so be sure to
capture it before the end of every testing session.

In addition to the classifier, you must come up with a reasonable
English-language explanation of what you think the underlying behavior
of each variant is intended to be, and support it with the evidence of
your classifier tests. Think of this as an exercise in building a
scientific theory (your proposed underlying behaviors) to support
observed experimental facts (the classifier test results). As you are
building your explanation, you may want to go back and refine your
classifier to include more precise or clear tests.

Put your classifier and your explanation together into a plain-text
file `mystery.txt`. The format of this file should be a sequence of
lines describing the tests, followed by a *blank line*, followed by
the English-language explanation on as many lines as needed. Each test
line should be in the following form (where white space can be one or
more spaces or tabs)

```
#n: "input string" A: "result" B: "result" C: "result" D: "result"
```

where `n` is a positive number. The values of `n` don't matter; the
numbers are just there to make it easy for you to refer to different
tests from your explanation text.

Note that this is the same format as produced in the web page log, to
facilitate cutting and pasting. But please don't cut and paste *all*
your tests: just include a minimal set that is needed to form a
classifier.

## Language and Grammar

The language is similar to the core of the interpreter project
(arithmetic, Booleans, relational operators, if-then-else) with the
addition of just two new expression forms to define and call
functions.  The expressions not related to functions and calling have
the same semantics as in the first part of this assignment.

The focus of your experimentation should be the function definition
(`letfun`) and call expressions, and in particular the way they
interact with *binding* of function and variable names. The semantics
of these features has subtle differences among the four variants. Note
that the *syntax* of these features is the *same* for all languages.

The full grammar of this language (ignoring precedence and
associativity concerns) is:

expr -> "letfun" %name "(" %name ")" "=" expr "in" expr
     |  %name "(" expr ")"
     | "let" %name "=" expr "in" expr
     |  "if" expr "then" expr "else" expr
     |  expr "||" expr
     |  expr "&&" expr
     |  "!" expr
     |  expr "==" expr
     |  expr ">" expr
     |  expr "+" expr
     |  expr "-" expr
     |  expr "*" expr
     |  expr "^" expr
     |  "-" expr 
     |  "(" expr ")"
     |  "true"
     |  "false"
     |  %num
     |  %name

(Here %num and %name are terminals representing integer literals and
variable names, respectively.)


## Important Notes

The interpreter is capable of failing with several different kinds of
exceptions, including "name is not in environment" and various type
errors, e.g. trying to add `1 + true`, which produces "expected
number, got boolean."  For the purposes of defining a discriminator,
an exception result is still a result, and is different from any
non-exception result (number or Boolean) and from other exception
results with different text.  So, for example, if you have a test that
produces "name not in environment" on one variant and "expected
number, got boolean" on another variant, that counts as a
discriminator between those two variants.  *You may find it useful to
provoke exceptions deliberately* in your discriminators.

The entry box for expressions is deliberately not very big, to
encourage you to *keep your tests short.* There is no need for
discriminators to be large!

Again, your classifier set should be no bigger than it needs to be to
discriminate all variants. On the other hand, there is no particular
virtue in reducing the set to just one test; indeed, that is likely to
make it harder to develop a good theory of what is going on in each
variant.

By the way, the JavaScript code for the different variant
implementations is present in this directory, but the whole idea of
this exercise is that you don't try to read it. (You wouldn't find
that easy, anyway.)
